[Music]
connecting minds is a space dedicated to
honoring the amazing authors
researchers clinicians artists and
entrepreneurs who are contributing to
our collective evolution
or simply making the world a better
place these thought-provoking
conversations are intended to expand our
horizons
so come with an open mind and let us
grow together
here is your host christian jordanov
hello and welcome to the connecting
minds podcast my name is christian
jordanov
and thank you so much for joining me
today on this 11th
episode of the podcast today
i have christopher m beige on
we had a two hour conversation almost it
was a wonderful conversation
relished every single minute of
re-listening to it while i was typing up
the show notes
so much depth to it you're in for a
treat
basically the focal point of the
conversation will be
chris's latest book lsd and the mind of
the universe
diamonds from heaven where he
it's basically an account of his 20-year
journey of
high-dose lsd sessions
between 1979 and 1999 where he undertook
deep exploration of his consciousness
and into the mind of the universe
as the title of the book suggests we
also discuss his first book
uh briefly life cycles which is about
reincarnation
so you're about to hear some amazing
stuff from chris really awesome guy
so glad he agreed to get on the podcast
he was actually the first
guest that i approached way back in
september so he was the first interview
i conducted so i was
extra nervous i i did a ton of
preparation i really immersed myself
into his work
you know his books his videos etc it was
a very
enlightening illuminating experience he
really opened my eyes to so many
concepts and authors and thought leaders
and pioneers in various different
fields and i have a reading list from
here till
the end of i don't know what it's that
long you know but um
so i really think you enjoy this episode
i don't want to
offer too many spoilers i think the best
thing to do is to just let
chris speak for the experiences
of you know hear it from the horse's
mouth as it were
even though we will only be scratching
the surface in this interview
of course he has a a rather large body
of work
that i highly recommend you check out
the of course links and
um to the books and to to
to his website some youtube videos etc
will all be in the show notes and on the
website
so yeah please get in touch with me let
me know how you like the episode
and thank you once again for joining me
today really appreciate you
investing your time in this podcast so
without further ado
i present you christopher m bash
alrighty today on the connecting minds
podcast we have christopher
m beige phd christopher beige
or chris is a professor emeritus in the
department of philosophy and religious
studies at youngstown state university
where he taught for 33 years he is a
fellow at the
institute of noetic sciences he is also
a junked faculty at the california
institute of anchor integral studies and
on the advisory board for graf
transpersonal training and the gruff
foundation
he's an award-winning teacher and an
international speaker
he's the author of four books and he
lives in
north carolina now he has written
several books today
will one of the topics of our discussion
will be his latest book
lsd and the mind of the universe
diamonds from heaven chris thank you so
much for
taking the time out to join us today
what a pleasure to be with you christian
all right so we have
a lot of ground to cover in a relatively
short space of time
so what i would like to do is to start
with
i would like if you could please tell us
what were you up to between the years of
1979 and 1999
uh and maybe introduce us
to your journey into
uh exploration of your consciousness
but also in parallel if you could
kind of tell us how your career
progressed during this time so if you
could kind of
tell this i know it's a parallel story
that you you lived
almost two lives if you could kind of
try almost there
yeah be glad too uh i
came out of graduate school in 1978 i
was
trained as a philosopher of religion i
was raised in the deep south
uh got my phd from brown university
i had finished my dissertation had done
some published part of my dissertation
and i was looking for where to take my
research
next as a young academic i had no
experience in psychedelics
whatsoever at that time i was
30 years old and i encountered the work
of stanislav groff i read his book
realms of human unconscious which was
published in 76
and as soon as i saw his work on
psychedelic research
i immediately recognized that this was
an important
development not only for psychology but
for philosophers as well
that he had a method for giving us
experiential access to dimensions of
mind and dimensions of the universe
that many people have talked about and
theorized about but not many people have
had direct access to
so i made a choice at that point i was
not comfortable with the choice but
because
lsd was illegal and his work was
primarily centered on lsd at the time
because it was illegal i divided my life
into
a hat into two parts in my daytime job
i worked as a flaw as a professor in the
department of philosophy and religious
studies i taught courses on world
religion
psychology of religion buddhism
comparative mysticism
transpersonal studies and in my personal
life i began
a 20-year journey exploring
working with lsd in a systematic
rigorous manner using
stan gross protocols i over the course
of the next
20 years as i progressed through the
academic world
i did 73 high-dose
lsd sessions completely internalized
completely protected with the sitter
using the traditional formats
private safely protected from the world
with the assistance of a sitter who kept
me safe and
secure during this process and i
basically began
a process this process and found that it
engaged me
systematically into a deepening and ever
deepening exploration
of my own consciousness and eventually
into a consciousness that was so large
so vast where some people where i
you could describe it as the the
consciousness of the divine
but i often just refer to it simply as
the the mind of the universe
so while i continue to teach and i love
teaching i love being with the students
teaching in these areas
i uh basically developed this second
life
and it wasn't until after i retired from
the university
and after i was passed the statute of
limitations for working with these
what our culture deserved called
illegal substances that i was really
able to begin to share
uh the full scope of the experiences
that i had had
on this substance and to extract some of
the
philosophical implications of these
experiences
right and so that was a 20-year journey
that
ended in 1999 how did your
career progress over those 20 years
oh in a very traditional manner i mean i
was progressed i mean
promoted up the ladder as ones does i
published
through the process i won two awards
at the university for my teaching i love
teaching love being with the students
i did the things that an ordinary
professor does i worked on committees i
did all the things that you do at a
university in a department
uh my department is the comp was a
complex department filled with
philosophers and religious studies
professors
uh whom i became dear and close who
became my dear and close friends over
the course of time
um yeah it was just kind of a
traditional academic career
and you you had three kids along the way
yeah so you you could say you you led a
productive life contributing to society
um yeah so which i think is important
because i think
there's still this stigma people recoil
when they hear someone
even a a learned person an academic uh
is you know did stuff with psychedelics
they recoil and think of this person you
know
they'll never be a productive member of
society and it's quite the contrary
um so along the way around i think 1990
you published your first book
life cycles could you please tell us
what life cycles is about
life cycles is about reincarnation
when i was on my first sabbatical and i
could only write books during my
sabbaticals
[Music]
i had been researching reincarnation
when i
when i met stan groff's work i also met
the work of ian stevenson
professor at the university of virginia
and his work convinced me that there was
he had collected
empirical evidence that reincarnation
was a simple fact of life it's simply
something nature is doing
this completely jarred me because
reincarnation had not been a serious
part of my academic training it was not
part of my education in western
religions which is where i
spent most of my academic life training
nor in
philosophy religion or the scientific
study of religion
but here it was this massive body of
evidence collected he's collected
evidence from children
all over the world from different
cultures
who have spontaneous recall of their
previous lifetime
ninety percent of the cases he never
publishes because they don't meet the
highest standards of
scientific investigation but about 10
percent of his cases are
are very very important and substantive
uh cases indicating that these children
have an
accurate and documented recall of their
previous life
so i wrote life cycles after teaching
about this material for years and
introducing it into to my students for
years
i wrote this book basically which begins
with a review
of the evidence for reincarnation coming
from ian stevenson
and supplemented by the research coming
from past life's therapists who were
writing a number of very important works
at the time
and then i explored once we had that
evidence in place i explored what the
implications
of the evidence were what what
difference does it make
if we are growing up in a universe where
reincarnation is a simple fact of life
so that was the my first project
it ruffled some feathers in my
department because they weren't
expecting a book like this
but it's gone on to be published in six
languages
and it became a staple in my courses and
it's a very easily accessible and yet
academically sound uh investigation of
reincarnation
yeah it was sold out i've been trying to
get it from amazon for a while
but you in your book
i believe you published in 2001 uh
dark knight early dawn in chapter i
actually got that book a couple of weeks
back i've been
slowly going through it it's you know
it's
it's definitely yes it's it's it's not
the kind of book it's not a light
reading book i read it in the mornings
when you know my brain is still you know
optimal but um in chapter two you you
you nicely summarize um uh
the the you know the stuff you talk
about in life cycles which i really
appreciate
guys like you that judging from the
books
behind you you know you read books and
then present the information to us in a
digestible manner which i really really
appreciate but uh what was interesting
is that in the cases of the children who
remember their past lives
it seems like the average period between
lives is something around two and a half
years
but when people do past life regression
therapies
it was some somewhere more around 40 50
years which i think was
pretty fascinating because to consider
the
implications of your
soul or your being being in between
bodies for such a long period of time in
these dimensions
uh it's unfathomable the amount of
learning and development that could be
going on so that's just really
fascinating
and i was actually aware of ian
stevens's work before that so
you know you don't have to um uh
convince me
but for folks that are just kind of
hearing this for the first time um chris
has a really good youtube video that i'm
going to link
in the description of this episode where
he talks about i think it's about 35
minutes
that uh you basically present
ian stevenson's work and then some past
live uh
therapists uh accounts of that in some
books so there's a really good resource
there on youtube
and thank you and the import really
philosophically the important aspect of
reincarnation research i think
is that it it invalidates our dominant
paradigm
about consciousness and that our
dominant thinking in our culture at
university culture
is that our minds are produced by our
brain
so our brain is the core reality and it
gives off a glow which is our mind
and reincarnation
fault it invalidates that because if
there is any period of time before
between the death of one personality and
the birth of a second personality
and there is an organized transfer of
memories
from one life to another then there has
to be a dimension of reality where
consciousness can exist
independent of a physical substrate of
the brain
underneath and that tells us that the
universe is much more complicated
has many more layers to it than where we
have
traditionally thought up to this century
exactly
that is beautifully said so this is
where things like
lsd psilocybin um certain other
antiogenic compounds psychedelics if we
want to call them
they seem to be able to allow us
to tap into these dimensions they seem
to like open up the gates
so with that said can you
uh chris can you tell us can you give us
an overview
i suppose of uh
stan groff's work what he contributed to
the trans person of you he in a sense
you know is one of the founders of the
transpersonal field but can you tell us
what happens to an individual what
happens when one takes
a normal dose of lsd
let's say and what happens when a person
consistently brings themselves into that
state
and what happens when someone takes high
doses
consistent can you basically tell us uh
you know discuss the
phenomenology talking about
psychodynamic transpersonal perinatal
as as groth laid it out and then
the contributions you added on on top of
gruff's paradigm
generally and then what you experienced
in your journey please
yeah well uh
stand differentiated in this where
extend graph differentiated between
low dose and high dose psychedelic
therapy
first we have to understand in
psychedelic therapy
you're not taking a psychedelic and
engaging the world you're not taking a
psychedelic and going to a concert
you're going into a highly protected
sheltered environment protected from the
outside world
completely focused internally you're
wearing eye shades you're listening to
very carefully selected music
the whole focus is on in confronting
whatever is emerging in your mind
and letting it take you where your mind
wants to go
our understanding is that lsd
and other psychedelics basically are
amplifiers of consciousness
they don't take our consciousness in a
particular way
they simply amplify consciousness and so
they make
dimensions of our mind which are far
removed
uh more available to us and so
when you amplify your consciousness and
then you sit
in a contemplative manner and you focus
on what's emerging in your mind
what often happens is that your
consciousness will use this
opportunity to cleanse itself to purify
itself to empty itself
of problematic experiences that it's
carrying so we would describe this
as confronting the shadow basically
one begins to confront all the things
that worry you that uh scare you
that terrify you one confronts things
coming from earlier in one's life
from childhood things that have happened
traumatic experiences all the way back
to your
uh to your infancy all the way back to
the womb
if one continues this process the mind
reveals that this is working with low
dose therapy
somewhere on the order of 50 to 150
maybe 200 micrograms
so if you keep this process up and you
go back
into deeper and deeper levels of your
life eventually one
gets into what stan calls the perinatal
level of consciousness
where you begin to confront the deepest
fears that
all of us share they're not personal
they're kind of universal the fear of
death the fear
of what happens to us when we die
the anxiety over whether there is any
ultimate meaning or purpose to our life
since we die since everyone we love who
dies
everything that we care about is
destroyed is there any larger purpose or
project
and one goes through the death rebirth
process
which often involves curiously reliving
one's birth and what emerges over time
is that uh you are transcending the
limits of your physical consciousness
so we get here by being born we leave
the physical world by dying
and so the birth and death are all
complexly
intertwined in the psyche so when one is
pushing beyond
the limits of your physical memory of
your physical
being physical consciousness one is
involved in reliving
how you got here as you transcend out of
here
going into states of consciousness which
transcend physical reality
and a critical piece of this is going
through what stan calls ego death
which is to say your physical
personality your body-mind ego
dissolves and you experience a loss of
control
and a death at that level and then when
that process
has completed itself one awakens
inside a spiritual reality inside a
deeper level of existence
and then if you go if you continue this
process
one begins to go deeper and deeper into
that spiritual reality through the
various levels of transpersonal
consciousness
which stand identifies as the psychic
subtle and causal levels of
consciousness
now a different protocol was developed
later
for working with terminally ill cancer
patients
this is these are patients that were not
trying to be healed
these are people who are going to die
and they developed a high dose
strategy working with lsd in high doses
somewhere between 300 and 500 micrograms
and the goal here this was at the spring
grove hospital in maryland
the goal here was not to
digest all the different aspects of
one's personal
shadow and personal consciousness but to
break through that
and to give these people an experience
of transcendence
essentially to give them a glimpse of
where they were going to be going
when their body dies and it was very
successful it had a tremendous
impact a positive impact on death
anxiety
so what i did i came along and i'm not a
psychologist and i wasn't
really interested primarily in the
clinical aspects of this work
i was a philosopher and i was interested
in exploring the deeper
dimensions of consciousness that this
work made possible
so i and in the early high dose therapy
the sessions were limited to three
sessions that was the maximum that any
one person could do
so i thought okay if you can do three
high dose sessions safely
then you should be able to do more than
three safely
i after three sessions of working with
lower doses i chose a regimen of working
with high doses of lsd
partly for efficiency partly because it
was a dual career marriage it was hard
to find time to schedule
one sessions and so i i was still
thinking in terms of
this being a personal transformational
process
i was thinking in terms of clearing out
my personal karma so i could get to
enlightenment faster
i thought if you worked with higher
doses and you really
confronted your shadow conscientiously
you would basically be able to dissolve
your
karma it was like eating a meal taking
bigger bites
out of your karma in every session
eventually this whole model
exploded as my work continued to deepen
because after about three years of work
i was entering dimensions of
consciousness
and was confronting levels of shadow
which
far transcended my personal shadow or
anything related to my personal life
i was tapping into the collective
unconscious
so what i did to back up a little bit
what i did was to do 73 high dose
sessions
extended over 20 years i worked for four
years
i stopped for six years for reasons that
i give in the book
and then i continued for another 10
years
i was doing about on average about five
sessions a year
so every two and a half months or so i
would be doing a session
uh and what i found was that
i went through repeating cycles
of death and rebirth about four or five
cycles
of death and rebirth and i found that
every
that the deep spiritual reality or
transpersonal reality has
levels to it many layers to it and
every time you enter a deeper level of
spiritual reality or
transpersonal reality you have to go
through another act of surrender you
have to let go
of your identity at a deeper and deeper
level
so you go through a series of death and
rebirth experiences
i also found that each level of
consciousness
operates at a higher level of frequency
so to speak
it's a much more intense energetic level
so it's like if you're climbing a
mountain you have to adjust to higher
and higher levels of
of altitude and you have to acclimate
systematically to that higher altitude
in this in in mountain climbing you're
adjusting to
less and less oxygen in psychedelic work
you're adjusting to more and more energy
so you have to
acclimate literally for your
consciousness to stabilize
and have coherent experiences at these
deep levels of reality
you have to go through not simply a
death experiences but
experience but you have to go through a
purifying
purification process you have to empty
yourself
of different levels of your being that's
in a sense are
operate at a lower level of frequency
and if you don't do this your
experiences at these deep levels
will not be coherent they will be
fragmented
you can touch into these levels but you
won't be able to
maybe recall them you won't be able to
remember them
consistently and you won't have coherent
experiences of these levels but if you
engage them
conscientiously if you gave engage them
with focus
and determination my experience has been
that your consciousness goes through
this self-purification process
and your your awareness at each level of
consciousness
gets clearer and clearer and clearer so
that you become
operational at a deeper level of reality
and if you keep pushing the boundary
sooner or later
you're going to reach the border of that
deeper level
you'll go through another purification
process another death and rebirth
process
and they'll be thrown into yet another
level of reality
that operates by different principles
it's governed by a different
physics so to speak and the process
continues
so basically that's what i did as a
philosopher this was the philosophical
adventure of a lifetime the opportunity
to explore the
the universe or the mind of the universe
through exploring
through using the vehicle of my own
consciousness because what i discovered
in contrast to contemporary thought
that our consciousness is not
individualized it's not like we are
a an atom that everything in my mind is
simply a result of the experiences of my
personal body
what i discovered is what many spiritual
traditions have taught and many
transpersonal
um uh explorers have discovered
is at the bottom of our mind that there
actually is no
bottom to our mind that when you go
deeper and deeper and deeper in your
individual mind
you open up into the ocean of
consciousness you open up into an
infinite ocean of consciousness so it
truly is the case that our
individual mind is like a wave that
arises out of an ocean of consciousness
and if you penetrate this wave you will
drop into this
infinite ocean which doesn't dissolve
you immediately into oneness
but it dissolves you into the ocean and
the exploration
continues that's awesome
now just to go back um
to the let's say the more beginning
parts of the journey
and this is something that groff talks
about a lot is
the initial stage of working with
lsd people generally explore
or go into the perinatal level
and this is where various traumas
surface in all the way including all the
way back to
um birth trauma but you in your
in your um in dark knight
early dawn and in lsd and the mind of
the universe you make you have a great
analogy
of um explaining the
coex systems as the dialogue or the
emotions of a
of a protagonist in a novel so with that
said
can you give us a deeper
overview of what the perinatal level
actually is because generally this is
kind of the first thing that people
you know um had get head on with
in their lsd work what is the perinatal
level what are the
what are coex systems what are the
four phases that groff discusses
and um what is the therapeutic potential
of allowing yourself to kind of get in
that level when we experience
those um let's say emotions
a coex system is a system of condensed
experience
so what we find is that you know the
psyche organizes its ex
its memories in many different ways but
one of the ways it organizes them
is that it groups all of our life
experiences according to its emotional
content
according to its emotional themes so the
analogy i give in the book is
imagine if you took a novel and you
underlined
all the passages that have to do with
fear in yellow
and all the passages having to do with
the protagonist
experience of greed in green say an
anger in red
and then you cut up the book and you
took the protagonist experiences and all
you grouped all the green in one pile
and all the yellow and another pile and
so on so forth
that you would have all of their
experiences of fear
clustered in one pile and something like
that happens
in the psyche that when you when you
encounter your shadow
you encounter your shadow in these
clusters
of condensed experiences so you often
get into
it feels almost like a tornado there's
just so many
layers and layers to it and the outer
layers
are the most recent versions of those
experiences
and as you get into the center of the
coax system
you get into the more and more elemental
layers until eventually you get to the
fundamental
core the original trauma the original
disturbance and when you in going
through this process you peel these coax
systems over time
and then eventually when you get to the
core
you relive the core trauma and when that
happens
the entire coex system has been
dissolved and so
its influence on your life has basically
been
emptied so you can you melt all your
experiences
related to fear you melt all your
experiences related to anger
so on and so forth now
what stan found is that
there are coex systems that relate to
things that happen to you
after you're born but they're also coex
systems that
seem to be rooted in the very act of
birth itself
so that the act of being born is a
traumatic experience here the fetus is
floating very peacefully and comfortably
in the womb
assuming that the mother is taking good
care of herself and her child
in the gestation process in pregnancy
but then all of a sudden that
environment becomes hostile
the water breaks and the womb begins to
contract
and the child begins to be put under
enormous pressure
which builds and builds until eventually
it climaxes in the child being released
from this pressure
into a new environment with its mother
and father that and stan broke this
process he found that there were kind of
four stages of this process
the and he labeled these the four
perinatal matrices
which are coex systems that are rooted
in the perinatal level of consciousness
and so they're the the first one that
usually appears they appear in different
orders but often the one that usually
appears could be correlated with the
beginning of labor
where there is contractions but no place
to go
the cervix hasn't been dilated then
there is
intensification of these symptoms of
contraction but the cervix is now
opened and there is a place to be to go
the death rebirth struggle begins this
culminates
in the final expulsion from the mother
uh the experience of death and
liberation and then
the experience of beatific bliss
perinatal
matrix 1 of oceanic bliss and ecstasy
and so what we find is if you kind of
step back
and look at many people's experiences
who have gone through this level
what we're finding is is that people
are basically confronting and digesting
their entire life as a physical being
their entire life
as a human being they are digesting the
experience that brought them
from another reality into time and space
and so this is part of the process of
basically allowing your consciousness to
expand
beyond the limits of your physical
identity
so you shatter your physical identity
but you dissolve
all the constellations of stress
and traumatic experiences and anxiety
that are involved in being born at the
physical level
and then you open up into the world that
lies beyond
the physical level but then the process
doesn't stop
there it's not simply a matter of
getting into physical
into spiritual reality but then it's a
matter of going
deeper and deeper and deeper into what
appears to be
an infinite and unlimited ocean
of possibilities
yeah you really really described that
really well
so it's a very obviously the experience
of a psychedelic is a very complex
but we have what you just described as
the perinatal level so
we also can consider the psychodynamic
level so
you know lower doses psycholytic therapy
may elicit more
uh psychodynamic experiences where
you know the people in your life and uh
your own emotions so you
this perinatal level goes deeper
so what then happens when you um
i guess overcome or dissolve these uh
coex systems or these kind of this birth
trauma when you actually
overcome all of that what happens then
then you open up into a process of
remembering who you are really who you
are
underneath your physical incarnation who
you are
underneath all your physical experiences
there is a
process of engaging what you might think
of as the deep structure
of the universe now of course
one way of in order to understand what
really happens
in these sessions you have to understand
what's happening in life
normally naturally and that is
uh reincarnation for me is a simple fact
of life
so reincarnation tells us that when we
die
we expand into another universe and then
when we're born
we contract into our egoic identity
at the end of that life we expand into
another universe
and then we contract into a smaller
egoic identity
and this process goes on over and over
again century after century millennia
after millennia what seems to happen
when you work with an amplifying
substance like lsd is that you
accelerate that process
and you deepen the process so in a sense
you when you go through ego death
in this process you go through a a
death experience which is truly
terrifying it really does
feel like you are physically dying it
feels like you are
absolutely losing control you've lost
control
of your life and you're going to die and
there is a fundamental way in which you
do
psychologically you do die but when you
die
you don't simply cease to exist you
actually are reborn
into the deeper landscape into the
deeper tapestry
of of consciousness
and so you begin to explore the world
that you enter
when you die physically so that's why
there's a
it's a strong correlation between
people's experiences with
deep psychedelic work and people who
have near-death episodes
so people who sort of suddenly have a
heart attack or something happens and
their body stops or their body
almost dies and their consciousness
explodes into a deeper dimension
for minutes at a time and then they come
back
talking about this other world that they
had contact with
and something like that happens with lsd
work that
you basically more slowly
shake off your physical identity and
open into
this deeper spiritual universe and if
you return to that
over and over again again working with
very very
i mean i worked at 500 to 600 micrograms
every session very very high doses of
lsd
now this is not a protocol that i
recommend i do not recommend that people
do this
for reasons i give in the book but
that's what i did
and those experiences kind of replicate
the the entry the experiences that
people who have
near-death episodes have you enter
into this deeper dimension you see
yourself
you see your life on earth from the
spiritual dimension
you see you begin to have contact with
the way the world is organized in
spiritual reality that there is a
structure to it
that there is an organization to it and
there is a
there is a relationship actually kind of
a
it's almost like a relationship of
physics there is a relationship between
the way the spiritual world is organized
and it is the spiritual world which
gives
birth to the physical world i mean the
big bang
everything that exploded into existence
13.7 or 13.8 billion years ago
the entire intelligence and all the
energy
and all the power and the unfolding
which takes place
all of that came from somewhere it came
from some reality that is not
physical physics stops at that point and
says we can't go any farther
but in deep states of consciousness you
can go
farther you can enter into the reality
that gave birth
to the physical universe okay
that's when you begin this i think of it
as a
first of all a communion it's because
when you enter this reality
you don't take your ego you know cleaned
up
buffed up you don't take an ego into
this reality and have an experience of
that reality
you literally dissolve into that reality
you lose your sense of a small reality
and you dissolve into this larger
reality
and for the hours that the session takes
place you are dissolved
into that reality and then of course
this
the drug wears off and slowly your
consciousness shrinks back into
your ordinary state and if you've worked
well
if you've really created optimal
conditions for this engagement
you come back with accurate memories
with strong
recall of where you've been and it's
important to
write down your notes from your session
within 24 hours i
followed a very very strict procedure
that within
24 hours of every session i wrote a
detailed
accurate description of exactly what
happened
in this session because this window
closes and if you wait
five days a week a month before you
write it down
you're not going to remember everything
as exactly as you can
when you first come back and then if you
do this
over and over again you begin to get a
very
coherent travelogue
of your experiences in this deeper
reality
and what i found was that when you
approach the deep
the mind of the universe in this
systematic fashion with the desire to
know a desire to understand
and you're asking it teach me show me
what is real
show me what is there that literally
this consciousness
is massive infinite consciousness takes
you
in and it begins a systematic process
of initiating you of teaching you what's
going on in this deeper reality
there was a couple of questions that
came into my head as you
started speaking but uh i think what is
clear
is that drugs like lsd can certainly
accelerate one's spiritual practice
but it's also very easy to
as you write in in your work it's very
easy to think
you have accomplished more than you have
in a single session
what would you say are some of the most
important practices
that other than keeping meticulous notes
of course and analyzing your sessions
what other practices
allowed you to contain these experiences
and embody them
on a day-to-day basis yeah
that's an important question and it's a
very important issue
um because stabilizing these states of
consciousness
and integrating your experiences in your
earthly life
are a real challenge what we're finding
is that it's not that difficult to break
through into these dimensions
but to hold on to them and to integrate
them first of all just to remember them
and then to try to integrate them and to
incorporate the teachings into your life
is a very very important part of the
work so it's like
half of the work is getting out and then
half of the work is getting in
and holding on to one of the ways that
this was expressed in my sessions that
uh spirit said there's the the dying of
seeing
and the dying of keeping the dying of
keeping is the integrating of these
experiences so
uh during all the years when i was doing
this work
i was doing spiritual practice i mean i
was basically doing meditation i was
doing spiritual practice in different
traditions
eventually my spiritual practice
centered in the vajrayana buddhist
tradition
but it began i began with transcendental
meditation
i did vipassina meditation
i was raised in a christian tradition
the teaching of christianity
influenced me very deeply i was actually
studying to be a priest for four years
when i was in high school in early
college
so i absorbed deeply the values of
of christian compassion self-sacrifice
so on and so forth and i also
incorporated elements from eastern
traditions
but it's really very important for lots
of reasons
to have a strong spiritual practice
in order to integrate and stabilize the
experiences that you have in these
short very intense days
because these psychedelic sessions open
you to
vast fields of awareness and knowing
but they also open you to vast fields of
energy
and a daily practice is really important
to be able to assimilate these huge
fluctuations these
tidal waves of energy entitled ways of
knowing that sweep through you
and you have to have a context to digest
them and slowly
you know roll them over in your mind and
hold them in your heart and really
digest them
so grounding is really important so of
the grounding of a spiritual practice
but other areas of grounding i mean as i
i didn't quite appreciate it so much at
the time
but when i got you know at the end of my
journey and was looking back i really
appreciated that
the stability of my career and the
stability of my marriage
and my responsibilities as a father you
know
every week i was in the classroom
teaching my courses
every day i was with my children every
day i was within
a primary relationship a relationship
with my wife
so these are very very stable grounding
activities i was grounded as a homeowner
i was grounded in my
weekly lifestyle and
that really provided me the foundation
that allowed me to open up into these
radically transcendent states
and then come back and hold them
in a way which didn't cause me to be
fragmented
or didn't cause me to be inflated
because one of the great dangers
of working with psychedelics is psychic
inflation
you can think because you've had a deep
experience that you must be a very
deep person or because you've had a an
experience where you've touched the
divine
that you must be a holy person but that
of course is an
illusion that's a fool's delusion
what's because what's important in a
psychedelic session
in this respect is not what happens to
you on the day of your session
it's what you can do in the days
following your session
when you're back in your ordinary state
of consciousness
so you may experience profound wisdom in
the day of your session
but how much of that wisdom can you
really concretize and embody
in the weeks following your session so
when you're raising children when you're
married
they really keep you grounded and keep
and they protect you
from uh being in having an inflated
sense of your value in the universe you
know in the end
you're just a human being shoulder with
shoulder with
all the other human beings in the world
getting by in the world trying to do the
best you can
yeah that's i that's what i really like
about you seem to have like
zero kind of ego inflation despite the
fact that you know you've touched
dimensions that
most folks you know they have to live
incarnate many many
lifetimes to get to that state you know
but um
i'm curious if you
didn't have that many responsibilities
and uh
that weren't so busy with this and that
how often would you have gone into
sessions if you could have
hmm that's an interesting question never
never thought about that
ah
i probably would have been tempted to go
more often
but uh i'm glad i didn't
because i found that going when you
completely
blow your mind apart and drink deeply
from the power and the knowing
of the deep universe it's an extremely
it's a not only a psychologically
demanding experience but it's a
physically demanding experience it makes
tremendous demands on your body
and on your subtle energy system on what
the
on your the chinese would call your chi
or the indians would call your prana
it's a very very demanding process to
open up your entire system and
and close it down open it up and close
it down
and that's one of the reasons i really
don't recommend this particular protocol
if i were starting over again i would do
it very differently i would work with
lower doses
i would only occasionally you work with
high doses of lsd
and because lsd is a kind of psychedelic
that tends to push the
cosmological ceiling it tends to sort of
push to the stars
i would balance that with working with
other psychedelics like psilocybin
or ayahuasca which are much more kind of
body grounded kind of states of
consciousness
they open your your system up but you're
much more kind of grounded
in your emotional body in your physical
body
so working with the psilocybin or body
grounded psychedelics and occasionally
with the
cosmological kind of high ceiling
psychedelics
that is i think produces overall a more
solid and secure journey but these are
things that i
understand now i didn't understand these
things when i was doing this work
when i was doing the work it was like
pedal to the metal let's blow it out go
as far as you can go drink as much of it
as you can
and i think i i not only um
i'm glad i didn't do it more frequently
than i did
because it really takes time to
assimilate these material
but i think probably i went farther than
was healthy
for one person to do even though i i
followed all the precautions i really
paid a lot of attention to my physical
body
to stabilizing my my my world keeping
everything on an even keel
even so i think i bit off a bigger piece
of the apple
then it's wise to chew and what you know
it's just
you know it took me years and years
after i finished my sessions to fully
internalize them and i don't really
think i've
finally internalized them even now i
think i'll be absorbing them for the
rest of my life
and i think in in deep ways they have
impacted not only the remainder of this
incarnation
but they've impacted the entire
trajectory
of my soul's future incarnations
yeah talking about the toll that it can
take just reading what a session day was
like for you
no breakfast because of you know the
potentially impending vomiting
all day added and then as soon as you're
done
you're up all night documenting
everything because you need to get it
on paper as quickly as possible so that
sounds like
more demanding than partying out on the
weekend going to you know
clubbing so very um
it's good that you took good care of
yourself
it is very demanding and what happens is
when you start to go past the early
levels that you might touch and parting
and you go into the deep levels
and you you don't start again at the
early levels
you start where you stop so it's like
climbing a mountain you establish base
camp one
base camp two base camp three you're
working at base camp three and above
these are extremely high energy
experiences
i found over the years i had to take
more and more precautions
i had to take more care of my body i
really made sure that my body was in
good condition i watched my diet very
carefully
i would even i would have massaged to
get my body nice and soft and pliant
or do i'd go to the chiropractor to make
sure that my body was aligned
because if you if you take a body that's
out of alignment
into these states you're going to feel
the pressures and pains that are living
within your body
and in addition to that i was doing
spiritual practice of course
and i would do very very intense
practice
for days before my session
and i would do very intense extra
spiritual practice in the days
following because this opening is so
huge
you're tapping so deep into the universe
it's it's extremely demanding and so the
demands are not only on the weekend when
you're doing it
but on the week before and the week
after and i found that it took
you know the closing of that window it
closes in stages
it closes within 24 hours but then it
closes
at a deeper level within three days and
it closes
over several weeks and it really takes
about
a month before it's completely
absolutely closed again that doesn't
mean you're
you're having psychedelic flashbacks or
anything like that
it just means that your entire system
opens and closes
organically and therefore there's a
there's a
underlying deep structure to that rhythm
so you really
really have to um take care of your life
at all the different levels and it's not
just and i learned and
that it's not just impacting you
because consciousness is like a
it's an ocean consciousness you know
your life is like a vibration within an
ocean
and or maybe thinking of it as a lake
and when you do
deep work like this when you engage and
set a deep ripple
like that in motion it ripples out
around you in 360 degrees
and it touches and influences the people
that you have karmic ties to
so that i found that even though my
students
never knew i was doing this work even
though you know i never talked to them
about it
never shared this with them i found that
some of my students began to be
activated in ways that were
directly related to what was happening
to me personally
in my session and that was was happening
not because
i was consciously willing it or i was
letting i was talking about it or
triggering it
it's hap what's happening simply because
that's the nature of consciousness
all spiritual traditions teach this that
when you engage these deep dimensions
you don't just influence your personal
life
you influence the lives of of the
reality around you the people around you
so i found that integrating my sessions
taking care of my person
in the sessions was only one phase of it
i also had to take care of anyone around
me
who is being impacted by this work so
there is a social dimension
to working uh responsibly with
psychedelics
i like i like that you took it in this
direction because i was just about to
quote
something from your book uh lsd and the
mind of the universe right so
just it's uh so basically this is
a quote uh you cite from marie
louise von france a lifelong
collaborator of
carl gustav young young
had come to a similar conclusion about
the collective import of deep
transformative work she wrote whenever
an individual works on his own
unconscious
he invisibly affects first the group and
if he goes even deeper he affects the
large national units
or sometimes even all of humanity not
only does he change and transform
himself
but he has an imperceptible impact on
the unconscious
psyche of many other people so that's
perfect how you describe
consciousness as a lake or or an ocean
and we literally send ripples
waves invisible waves that
reach potentially the ends of the
universe if there ever were such a thing
so with with this in mind could you
take us through what the
say mid and later stages of your journey
were like what did you
what experiences did you start having
well it took me about two and a half
years
and ten sessions to go through on
the psychodynamic and perinatal levels
and to go through my first deep ego
death experience
and i was quite surprised at what
happened next
first let me back up in every session
as this energy builds inside of you
there are two phases to every session
there's a cleansing phase
which is then followed by ecstatic phase
so there's a purification stage where
you begin to encounter
really deep deep disturbances and if you
surrender to that process
if you don't flinch and back away but if
you let yourself be drawn
deeper and deeper into this pain
whatever it is without understanding it
just go into it eventually this will
reach a peak
a culmination and you'll go through some
type of
deep surrender eventually into another
level of death
and when that happens you're drawn into
a very spacious place
a transcendent place where you move into
the ecstatic portion of the session
where you have a very positive and
the teaching continues at that level
so what i was surprised after i went
through ego death and i thought well
okay i've
i've reassimilated much of my own
personal shadow
uh what happened is that i
entered a period that lasted two years
of what i came to call the ocean of
suffering i began to have experiences of
vast collective suffering and i was
systematically taken
into the suffering stage by stage by
stage deeper and deeper
until eventually i was experiencing
hundreds of thousands of human beings or
stretched over thousands and thousands
of years
all of them in massive
pain and anguish and anger and killing
and destruction at first i thought this
represented a deepening of my personal
ego death but eventually this kept on
for so long
and involved so many people that i began
to understand
that what i was doing was engaging some
aspect
of the collective psyche of humanity
that not only do individuals have coex
systems where they consolidate
many many years of experience in these
thematic clusters
but that also in applies to the
collective unconscious
that the collective psyche or the mind
of our species
has an unconscious in which it stores
all of its unintegrated
life experiences so all the trauma of
war
all the trauma of droughts and famine
all the trauma the terrible things that
human beings have been doing to each
other
those register and collect not only at
the individual level
but they register and collect at the at
the collective level
and so eventually i came and it took me
a long time to
accept this idea because it sounded like
ego inflation even to claim it but
i think marie levi von france is right
when we do deep work
personal transformation opens into
collective transformation
we're working on behalf of humanity
we're working on behalf of the entire
species
and the healing which is taking place as
we
we're literally draining the pain not
out of the personal psyche
but we are draining the pain out of the
collective psyche
and remember that it's not like
crispy's private ego is draining this
pain but by this time chris bash has
been
shattered my consciousness is vast and
i'm
it's like the collective psyche is
draining the collective pain
out of the collective psyche this went
on for two years
uh on the positive side when i went
through
each session i went through a series of
ecstatically
beautiful powerful experiences in one
whole
year i began to have experiences of
experiencing my life
from beginning to end as a completed
whole
as a totality that was finished it was
both
going to happen and it already happened
and it gave me
a deep understanding of what my life was
about
and then for another year i was taken in
a series of initiations
deep into the universe taken back into
what appeared to be the very beginning
of the universe
and was given a teaching about
the evolutionary dynamic which
eventually culminated
in a series of experiences about
where humanity is going where humanity
is in its historical development
what is the next stage in its
evolutionary progression
but eventually the ocean of suffering
came to an end
i went through this profound final
death experience there and i was
catapulted
into what i came to recognize as what i
would call
archetypal reality so there was a
personal reality death ego death and
there was a collective reality death at
this level
i was catapulted into archetypal reality
and i began to have experiences which
were very unnerving in the beginning
because i had the experience
that there is a level of reality that is
more real
than time and space over and over again
when i went back to this reality
i was in a domain that was more real
than time and space
and in some ways which was the
generative matrix
which produces time and space
it was like plato's cave you know the
man in plato's cave where
he's chained and he only sees the
shadows of reality reflected on the cave
but eventually he leaves the cave and
encounters the reality that's producing
these shadows
it is as if i had entered a reality that
was producing the reality that we know
of as time and space
and then i spent about a year and a half
exploring
this dimension of reality and having
many experiences
of the collective psyche learning how
the collective psyche works
learning how it is that all of our
individual minds
are cells within this larger tissue
of the mind of the species and that the
species
is part of the larger tissue of the mind
of the planet the mind of the universe i
spent
about a year and a half exploring these
dimensions and then i went through
another death rebirth process
and was catapulted into
what you might call the domain of causal
oneness
i was catapulted into a level of reality
where all
boundaries all divisions all
all divisions became permeable
and i began to experience the universe
as
a singularity as a single
entity living and breathing as one
so that everything taking place inside
physical reality
were simply small
life forms that were basically
transparent
to the fundamental life of the universe
that's living within it
it's like being experiencing a forest
where there are thousands of trees and
hundreds of different species of trees
but you're experiencing the life that
flows through all of the trees the sun
and the moisture that flows through all
of the trees and doesn't care
whether it's nurturing a pine tree or an
oak tree or
you know doesn't care it's only the one
and so i had many experiences of oneness
uh experiences of what the buddhist
would call
a shunyata emptiness of self
because when you're experiencing the
world as one
you know that your individual life
doesn't have
private existence your individual life
it is
individual but it's open and it's porous
and it it is a you're breathing in and
breathing out constantly
the larger reality of oneness i had
experiences of the primal void
the the primal matrix out of which
all reality emerges over and over again
microsecond by microsecond
from there after about a year
in that reality i know i'm going very
fast through this material but
i went through yet another death and
rebirth experiences
and i was catapulted into
a reality of light
i had experienced cosmo cosmic light
many times
but i was catapulted in a domain of
light
that was exceptionally clear just hyper
hyper clear dimension of consciousness
it was
clear crystalline clear beyond
imagination
it is the domain that buddhism calls
dharmakaya
the clear light of absolute reality
uh i called it uh the diamond luminosity
the domain of diamond luminosity
an absolute ecstatic
transcendent reality in that
over the last five years of my work
and 26 sessions i
made contact with this reality i
dissolved in this reality
only six only four times four times
in five years in 26 sessions
in between those four times i was going
through again
deep deep intense purifications deep
catharsis around
purifying and purifying and purifying in
order to allow
to be allowed to enter back into these
hyper clear
hyper pure states of awareness so
i guess i would differentiate five
different levels of reality that i went
through over all this time
there's the personal level which
culminated in ego death
the collective level where you're
working basically
cleaning portions some portion of the
collective psyche of humanity
the archetypal level then the level of
causal oneness
and then the level of the diamond
luminosity
it was a long journey that that is
absolutely fascinating and
i would highly encourage folks to check
out the book or at least some of
your videos where you discuss this in a
little bit more
depth because um you know when we when
we look at
uh folks that have experienced
uh near-death experiences when we you
know we see what the
um what the tibetan buddhists when they
talk about
uh entering the bardo of death
they do discuss that we see a light
but most of us are not
say developed enough to realize that's
our own essential nature
so do you think this could be a part of
what the buddha experienced under the
body tree
this kind of experiencing this light do
you think these experiences are
something
the uh buddhists the tibetan meditators
these guys
are are experiencing getting into these
states after you know years and years of
meditation do you think it's possible
without lsd
it sounds arrogant i know to even
suggest
uh touching into that which the buddha
touched into
but i think it i think it is the
the cosmology of the understanding of
the universe that emerges in psychedelic
states is basically the same cosmology
that emerges in the great mystical
traditions of the world
the understanding of the bardo the
understanding of the post-death domain
the
understanding of the fundamental union a
new oneness that underlies
all existence we're tapping into the
same reality
and it's really important to understand
first
that
when you're working with psychedelics
you're tapping into this reality
in a temporary manner when you're
working with
meditation and the sort of slower
contemplative methodologies which take
longer to mature you gain access
in a more abiding fashion to these
realities
so i don't want to suggest in any way
that my experiences of these realities
were were comparable in terms of their
significance
to the experiences of the great
spiritual masters
of our different spiritual lineages not
at all
but even to have temporary access to
these realities
uh change forever
they change your life forever they
completely banish your fear of death
they they allow they
revise your complete understanding of
the world that you live in
of how the world works and also these
experiences
are very useful to use in your daily
meditation practice that even have
temporary access to some of these
dimensions of reality then can be used
to deepen and accelerate your
daily contemplative meditation practice
so i think there is a correlation there
i would place the diamond luminosity
experience
in what the buddhists call extra
samsaric reality
that is samsara is the world of
individual existence the world of cyclic
existence
and so that includes everything in the
physical universe where everything
arises
and falls arises and falls but also in
spiritual reality when you die you enter
the bardo
multiple levels of reality where
everything is temporary everything is
it's much longer than physical reality
but still everything is temporary that's
part of the world of reincarnation
but then it's possible to go outside
that entire
system outside the system of death and
rebirth outside
the reality of samsara
and i think that's what i was tapping
into in the diamond luminosity work
and that's what is held as a possibility
in all the deepest spiritual traditions
dharmakaya is the highest level
of reality that one taps into
in the vajrayana buddhist tradition
again i do not i'm not a mystic
i'm not an enlightened being temporary
access
is different than permanent access all
honor to the great masters
who have abiding permanent access to
these realities
but even just to touch them temporarily
is a profound life-changing experience
a great degree to know and i like um
i like again that you're very you know
you
exercise humility but um
i i think it's it's what
they do say we all have
the buddha nature like the the core of
mind
is uh uh you know our essential nature
or i
yeah i think the tibetans also call it
rigba
but uh we if we if we are all
uh part of this universe which is like
you say it's all the divine
we must have the spark of the divine
within us so
to be able to access it whether it's for
a second or a lifetime
is certainly uh significant
especially with with our current egoic
uh minds that have so many layers
so many layers of of of of
complexity that obscure this essential
nature so i think it's
yeah it's good that you're humble but
these are very important experiences and
um we know we know there's some
research being done that psylocyben can
induce a mystical
experience in people and these are very
important things in our especially
in our world today and this is actually
uh maybe let's go
a little bit back from the diamond
luminosity
in terms of you you you didn't make some
before we go quite there let me add
something that you just said
in my own sequence of experiences after
getting contact with the diamond
luminosity domain
and that extra samsaric reality my
experiences actually pivoted
and began to lead to a deeper
internalization of that reality so that
eventually it brought me back into
right here right now my present life my
present mind
and it uncovered this buddha nature
this essential nature which is right at
the very
center of my mind and at the center of
all of our minds
it is a a hyper clear
transparent reality out of which all
emotions arise
out of which all sensation arises out of
which all
thought arises it neither begins nor
ends it doesn't it's not private it's
universal
it is our essential nature when we tap
it we know
that we're tapping into the essential
nature of all beings
uh it it doesn't change
it doesn't become better uh it neither
begins nor ends it has no boundaries
and yet it is the most
fundamental level of our own being
and to tap into it is like finding
diamonds in your pocket
i mean it's just the most precious thing
in the world and here it is right in the
center of our own mind
and it's impossible to be without it we
don't pay attention to it
usually we don't rely on it but there it
is it's always waiting for us it's
always there it's always nurturing us
and it's patiently waiting for us to
turn our attention
away from the world outside of us back
into the world that's within us
and when we go deeply enough we find
this extraordinary
truth waiting for us and i
and i want to differentiate you don't
have to go through all the experiences
that i went through in order to find
this
uh you know i differentiate the use of
psychedelics for spiritual awakening
which is what we're talking about here
and using psychedelics for cosmological
exploration
you don't have to go through archetypal
reality you don't have to go back to the
birth of the universe you don't have to
explore the deep structure of
bardo reality in order to clear your
life
in a way that allows you to have
immediate
daily access to this fundamental nature
that's
living inside of you that is what you
are at the deepest level
and so i just want to
make clear that getting goosebumps
yeah you don't you know it's like what i
did
really is best described in terms of the
project of cosmological exploration i
wanted to
understand the deep structure of the
universe i wanted to understand how
things
work but you don't have to go through
that
in order to rest in your own essential
nature
that is a much more kind of uh
targeted project
uh in one spiritual practice
well you are you know a scholar academic
philosopher so it's
i think most humans cannot undertake
what you did even if they wanted to i
i'm sure there's a few guys out there
that
will follow attempt to follow in your
footsteps and you know
god bless them and best of luck to them
uh
you know but i i don't think most
people will have the resolve to go
through to
because a byproduct of of your
experiences as
as beneficial they are to your
uh souls uh evolutionary trajectory
you've also contributed a significant uh
amount of thought to you know the
transpersonal field
critical um appraisal of the
you know the near-death literature the
uh
the reincarnation work so there's a lot
of you've made a great contribution
as part of your work right but um what
there's a couple of there's actually
quite a few directions i want to take it
but i'd like to actually go back because
we we will definitely come back to the
light and the diamond luminosity i feel
like this is
this is a topic that uh needs a little
bit more discussion before we finish up
but let's just go back to a little bit
earlier in the journey so
in the book i believe the chapter was
called the birth of the future humans so
you did mention a little bit about that
but can you can you tell us what uh
visions you had about the the trajectory
of our human evolution
well what i'm going to describe now i
know sounds fantastic i know it sounds
seemingly arrogant to even suggest
that a human being can have these kinds
of experiences but i have no recourse
except to simply describe what happened
and i think that chapter the birth of
the future human
is probably the most important chapter
in the book
and it's the most surprising to me and
unexpected
because when i began this work i thought
this was about my personal
transformation
my personal you know whatever whatever
but what i found was as the work
deepened once i reached a certain point
once i about 23 sessions into the
process
when i would move into the ecstatic
portion of the session
i began to be shown things and it what i
was being shown was consistent
session after session starting from the
23rd session
going all the way to the 70th session
periodically from time to time i would
be drawn
deep into what i would call deep time
deep time is
a level of of reality where time
behaves differently than it does inside
time and space i was
taken outside linear time into deep time
into a
not into eternity not where there is
timelessness
but into a deeper dimension of time
itself
and i was shown things about
where humanity had come from and where
it's going first i was shown
that the entire evolutionary project is
rooted in a profound
cosmic love and that everything that's
happening to us
inside time and space is part of this
process
of creation and creation emerges out of
love and it's always suffused with love
and that i was shown over and over again
that humanity is coming to a significant
shift in its future a profound
catharsis point a a bifurcation point
in its history uh and that we were on
the
on the verge of a profound spiritual
awakening
a profound transition
in our history as a species
it really was i began to realize that
nature simply isn't trying to awaken
individual human beings nature is in the
process of awakening
the entire human species that there is
something taking place at the very
core of our collective psyche
and then once again we're looking at a
species which is reincarnating
over and over again every hundred years
or so every just you know
life pulsating with life pulsating with
life and that
we were evolving not only individually
but we
were evolving collectively
and i kept being shown we're coming to a
turning point
a major turning point a profound
uh awakening of the human of
spirituality within the human heart
a profound tapping into
the oneness that underlies all existence
because the ego is a magnificent thing
the ego is beautiful the ego is
individual awareness
but the ego lives in a divided reality
so there's
your reality my reality everybody's in
separate realities
but oneness is the reality that we all
emerge out of
oneness is our common core reality and
there was
coming it showed an explosion of oneness
within the human heart
and a society which is rooted in oneness
in the experience of oneness
creates a different social structures
and different social forms
than a society which is rooted in the
division of ego
so i kept being shown that there is this
turning point coming that there was a
spiritual awakening coming
but it never explained to me how it was
ever going to happen
how this was going to take place and
then in 1995
in my 55th session i went through
what was to me a seminal experience
i went through into deep time i went
into the deep future
and i went through the death and rebirth
of our species
i went through instead of ego death or
collective death i went through
i experienced a major global crisis
that was being driven by
a ecological crisis being driven by
global climate change and all the
derivatives of global climate change
but which triggered a crisis in
all of our governing structure all of
our economic structures
all of our political structures
that basically this was a crisis that
was putting enormous pressure
on the human species and causing
enormous suffering
for the human species i went i was
experiencing this not as crisp beige
but i experienced it as the species
itself i had dissolved into the species
mind
i experienced a period of increasing
loss of control
inability to control the outcome of
circumstances
inability to control the circumstances
of one's life
families being torn apart just a
crushingly painful experience
and what i saw what i experienced or
what i was shown
was these experiences were so widespread
it wasn't like any other period of
history before if there is a hurricane
that it impacts one country or one part
of the world it doesn't touch the other
parts of the world
but this was an experience that was
touching all the people on this planet
wherever they live and that means it was
registering not only in their
individual lives but it was registering
in the collective
psyche itself and it was hyper
energizing the suffering that we were
going through
was hyper energizing the collective the
field of the collective psyche
and driving it into what physicists
would call
non-linear conditions so
physicists differentiate between systems
that are operating in a linear
mode and then systems which become
so highly energized they operate into a
non-linear mode
and when systems are in non-linear modes
things can happen that can't happen in
linear conditions
small changes produce large outcomes
things can happen very very fast
and nature pulls out from within it
higher forms of integration higher forms
that did not
that were always potentially present but
weren't there before
i mentioned this because what happened
in the session
is that as this pain got worse and worse
we came to a point where it looked as if
we were going to die this was a massive
extinction event for the species
but just when we had gotten to that
breaking point
the storm as it were passed
and we survived and when we began
to pick ourselves up off the ground so
to speak
and rebuild our lives we were different
we had been changed there was something
about this profound catharsis this
profound
uh inheriting and shedding
of the karma of our past as a species
something about the way this trauma had
broken us down
and forced us into
into a new openness of heart into a new
depth of mind into a new
depth of sharing with other human beings
the way that happens in a crisis you
know when there is a huge social crisis
suddenly people are helping each other
they're working together
this was happening and it opened up a
future
i saw a future emerging i experienced
a future emerging where human nature
had been changed it wasn't just that our
political system had been changed our
industrial system had been changed
but the fundamental core of human nature
had gone through a pivot and we were now
operating out of a different collective
psyche
we were operating out of a collective
that knew things that previously
only advanced spiritual beings
knew we had access to the universe
which paralleled the access that the
great saints and saviors of history had
had
but now it had been sufficiently
internalized
that it become part of our dna so to
speak
we were we were literally spiritually
awakening
we had awakened into oneness and when we
began to move forward
we built a different society this is
what i came to call the birth of the
future human
that's i think what's happening in
history we have entered now
the labor of birthing the next
iteration the next formation of the
future human
this future human has been gestating
inside us
for thousands and thousands of years as
we live and die and live and die and
reincarnate again and again
we have been growing and developing and
growing and developing
but the ego still tends to dominate our
lives and our choices
but it was as if in this crisis
something shattered
something opened and our our deep
consciousness
our soul consciousness exploded forward
in the human psyche
and we began to live out of a different
psychological basis
and we began to create a different world
and then later after this 55th session
in the 70th session again i was taken
deep into the future and was given the
experience
of the future human i dissolved
into this archetype of the future human
and if i try to describe this being
i'll probably end up crying just because
this being is
so magnificent we are giving birth to a
new child in the universe this being was
extraordinarily magnificent
and a heart that had been healed of all
the traumas of all the wars and all the
terrible things we've been doing to each
other
at our lower level of development a
heart that was profoundly encompassing
and encompassed the whole breadth of the
human family
and a mind that was profoundly clear
able to download information from the co
from the mind of the universe capable of
knowing things the sustaining levels of
awareness
that previously only great geniuses and
and great spiritual beings
had been able to sustain this was an
awakening which was changing the very
foundation
of life on this planet this is i think
what we have entered i mean i think the
covet 19 perhaps is simply the overture
of a crisis which is going to deepen as
global climate change
impacts us at deeper and deeper levels
we know we're going into a hard time
we're nowhere we're going into it a time
of deep
deep disruption what's important to
understand i think
from a spiritual perspective is what's
actually taking place
what's actually taking place is that
we are in the process of burning off a
huge amount of
personal and collective karma we are
burning off the consequences of the
choices that we have been making as
a species while we have been operating
out of a private consciousness out of an
individual consciousness
where i can make my life better if i
push off the
pain and suffering onto other persons
but now we're beginning to create
a profound sense of oneness
consciousness
where we are beginning to build a world
which truly does work for all
this is a spiritual transformational
process
it's an evolutionary process and it's a
process which is being driven
not so much at the individual level
individuals are cooperating with it
but it's being driven by the
intelligence of the universe itself
just as it has driven all the other
quantum jumps
that have taken place in the
evolutionary process
it's likewise now taking humanity into
this
deep jump in its uh in its archetypal
structure
are living in hard time but we are
living in extraordinarily important
in times which will lead to a
magnificently beautiful outcome
if we do our jobs well if we really dig
deep and do our jobs well like you you i
think you like to say that we chose to
be here
yes when we do more we chose
yes i think every human being on this
planet before they incarnated
in spiritual reality they could see what
we were getting into
they could see what they were getting
into and they chose to be part of it
so there are no victims here they're
just people
actors in a place so to speak who made
conscious choices
to be on this planet during this time
when it is going through this convulsion
convulsive period
in the end when we die we don't die i
mean we die
clearly and there is mourning to be done
but at a deeper level the soul doesn't
die
and in a deeper level we come back we
keep coming back and we continue to
participate
and this is this is how life works i
mean
we are going through a process and
humanity will be here
for another for millions of years for
billions of years yet i mean this
we are evolving in the life of the
universe
we are being taken somewhere
extraordinary and even though my
personal chris baish won't live to see
it
my soul will participate it in sub
in later reincarnations as we all will
it's a it's a deep and and because we
all chose to be here
um i think we can get we should get past
quickly the anxiety of being here
we can simply roll up our sleeves and
get to work
doing the work that we chose to do
before we incarnated
and this is you know perfect again you
set me up
perfectly for what i wanted to discuss
next i
i've been thinking about um you know
death a lot lately which
for many of my peers would be like
what's wrong with you are you depressed
but i think this is such a such an
important thing
to think about and even more importantly
get over
so you can get on with your mission
uh your intent that you came with here
so i know you've said this on in other
places but
i would like to share this with my
audience um
uh what i and you already kind of
mentioned some stuff but
how do you when you think about your own
personal death as chris bash
how do you think about that
well one of the consequences of doing
this work is that
i'm i have no fear of death whatsoever
in fact death is something i'm looking
forward to
i'm not eager to push it i'm not going
to run off and kill myself
but i have no fear of it because i have
already
tasted the world that i'm going into
when i die
and to be afraid of death is
to be trapped inside the physical world
and to be trapped in the illusion that
the physical world is the only world
that's real
when so many areas of research are
showing us that this is just simply not
true
the physicists have shown us that 96
of the of the universe is invisible dark
matter and dark energy
so only four percent of the universe's
physical matter is manifesting as
physical matter
near-death episode research is showing
us again and again that when we die
we enter an extraordinarily beautiful
dimension
we enter we return home so to speak
to the reality that we were in before we
incarnated
reincarnation research is showing us
that we go back and forth
over and over again between the
spiritual reality
and the physical reality not because
we're being punished
but because we are choosing to
participate in the conscious creation of
this species
in this conscious universe
i'm not afraid of dying i look forward
to it in the sense that i
of course i look forward to graduating i
look forward to returning to the domain
of bliss
um it's kind of like um
when we're born the hard work begins
when we die we graduate
into into returning to a deeper
level of knowing to a deeper spiritual
reality
now of course if you go through
a deep enough spiritual death and
rebirth in your physical life
then you don't have to die in order
die physically in order to die
psychologically there are beings
great beings who are in their physical
body
but they are complete they are already
living the bliss of spiritual reality
inside their physical existence and i
think this is where we're going we
literally are creating heaven on earth
in that by going through our own
developmental process
we are physically alive on earth
but inwardly spiritually psychologically
and even physically in some ways we
become
so transparent to the infusion of the
spiritual world
that we are literally mingling heaven
and earth
inside the vessel of our physical body
so that when we speak about someone who
is spiritually awakened
or spiritually liberated another way of
thinking about that is
they have simply become transparent
to the energies of the spiritual
universe they don't have to die
in order to die spiritually they are
already living in the spiritual
world inside their physical body
and when you have enough of these
experiences when you go through death
and rebirth often enough
one of the things you'll learn is that
you can't die
you're the essence of what you are can't
die chris baish will die the
shell of chris baish will die the
physical form will die
but the essence of the individual does
not die
the essence of the individual continues
to live in an
even greater and more luminous
and more love-soaked reality so
if there were any one thing that i wish
i could bring from my work
and and give it to people it would be
the loss of the fear of death
that's so important i think yeah now
when you enter the bardo
and you see the light
maybe this is an uh a question that you
cannot answer at the level of
chris beige but what do you think
you will do when you see the light when
you merge with the light when you become
the light you think you will ever come
back
in human form
[Music]
well i've decided to
put that decision in the hands of the
being that i will be
after i die i have
spent so many days exploring
the beauty of that spiritual universe at
so many levels
that naturally there is in me a profound
desire even a need to
explore that universe more and there is
a longing
to enter more deeply
into this magnificent universe so
naturally there is i would rather be
there than be here
but i basically trust that
when i'm there i'll know better than i
could know here
uh what would be the best thing for me
to do
and how to support our collective
developmental process
than i could know here so i just have
rolled that decision
into my um into my soul
into the consciousness that will hold
crispy's life and
merge it with all the other lives that
this soul stream has
had and i'll let that decision be made
then
that's wise so
just as we wrap up
maybe let let the listeners know
why you decided to stop your sessions in
please ah
well as i explained in the book i
stopped for two reasons
uh one was pain and one was heartache
basically uh as i've mentioned
these experience these states of
consciousness are so intense they
involve
so much of a increase of our energy
i found that my my physical system was
was running very hot my subtle energy
system was running very hot
i was having more and more difficulty
integrating the the sheer energy
that it takes to enter these states in
my
physical incarnation and i did lots of
spiritual practice that helped
but in the end i began to understand
that i was really running too hot
and i need to needed to stop and let my
my body calm down to let my subtle
energy system calm down
there was no pathology i was not having
any flashbacks or anything like that
but i needed to sort of cool down
some so to speak but that's not the main
reason i stopped
the main reason i stopped was heartache
once you have known the joy of
dissolving
into light of becoming light once you've
known the joy
of dissolving so deeply into the
crystalline body of the divine
coming back into time space at least
into the
incarnation that i have the limitations
of my present incarnation
coming back into this time space reality
it's just painful it's it's so difficult
to go from such exquisite intimacy
with infinite being back into
private finite existence
uh the going out and coming back
was getting was becoming too hard and
eventually
i asked the universe and i called my
beloved i
i asked my beloved never to take me back
this deeply until i could stay with her
forever
and that's when i stopped the sessions
i was surprised by what happened next
i found that it took years i thought i
had had so many
i had been given so many gifts i'd had
so many blessings given me
that i could simply stop my session step
back
and i had a wealth just to digest for
the rest of my life
but what i found instead that's true
that that's part of it
but the other part of it was that
i found i had in me a deep and profound
longing to return to these states of
diamond luminosity
and i knew i i couldn't return to them i
it wasn't good for me to return to them
anymore in this incarnation i knew i
would not go back there again
until i died i i could
if i took a massive dose of lsd today i
would not return to these dimensions it
takes
years and years and years of sustained
work to develop the energy
and the momentum to enter these states
of being
so i knew i was waiting until i my
physical life
died before i could really return and
there was a tremendous
unfulfilled kind of longing for more
communion
as long as i was returning to these
states periodically
once a year or so
this imbalance had not manifested but
once i stopped i realized that i was
there was an imbalance that i had
created between
too much transcendence and not enough
imminence
now the entire physical universe is the
body of the divine
it's not like i was going into the
divine and coming out of the divine
but i was going into the transcendent
divine
and coming back into the physical divine
into the imminent divine
and it took me about 10 years
to really make my peace with this and to
really
get completely consolidated
to being comfortable and to be
at peace living inside the physical
universe again
in my physical condition but i also
discovered that part of the sadness that
i experienced in ending my sessions
was that my culture did not allow me to
talk about these things
i just you know because psychedelics
were illegal i couldn't talk about it at
the university
i'm a philosopher and i love to teach
but i wasn't allowed to do philosophy
drawing from these very important
experiences i could not share them i
could not talk about them
and if you're not allowed to talk about
these deep and profoundly important
things
it tends to make you sick inside so for
me
finally giving myself permission to tell
the story of this journey to share it
with other people not because
not because i'm special in any way but
simply that
these experiences might be useful to
other people
in their own spiritual journeys in their
own social journeys
that actually represented a process of
putting together the two halves of my
life that i had separated
i had separated my academic life from my
spiritual life
and now i was beginning to put them
together and to
um and to bring myself into
wholeness again so the heartache that i
experienced
when i uh stopped my sessions
has begun to be soothed and
as this integration process has deepened
in the writing of the book
and in the beginning to have
conversations like the one we're having
something interesting has been set in
motion
it is as if uh the divine is not waiting
for me to come back to it when i die
but it is as if the divine is beginning
to come from me
here uh so there is a
deepening sense of peace a deepening
sense
of
permeability to
the ever-present divine dimension of
life
even inside uh the nuts and bolts of our
physical existence
beautifully said chris
i want to thank you for your work uh
just i was going over lsd and the mind
of the universe
over the weekend just i have almost
every third page
in this book is dog-eared and the top is
double dog-eared in certain
places where it's really important for
me to go back i have
a list of probably a couple of dozen
authors
whose work i need to investigate that
came out of you
i want to thank you for bringing them
all to to
our attention for synthesizing their
work for
um undertaking this exploration of yours
and bringing it to the world i really
want to thank you for that
and i really appreciate your time um
just before you can tell us where to
find you and your work can you
tell us do you what do you what
in terms of continuing your teaching
what is your plan for the future do you
want to plan around more books or you
were saying something about workshops
what's your kind of plan for next
whatever few years
well i'll tell you um
when i wrote lsd in the mind of the
universe or as i prefer the title
diamonds from heaven
i had a com deep sense of closure i felt
like
i had finished my life's work i had done
what i was
came here to do in sharing this
information
but i love to teach i love to be with
the people kovit 19 of course has
interrupted all of those things but
i love to be with the people and i love
to
explore these topics and conversations
so
i hope opportunities will will occur
i look forward to entering into
retreats to do retreats with people just
to have to open up
the sort of psychedelic conversations
and circle
so that i can not only talk about the
experiences that i have but that other
people can have the opportunity to talk
about the experiences that they have had
because clearly all of our experiences
together
are more important than any one person's
experiences by themselves
so i hope that uh to be doing retreats
you know shorter retreats longer
retreats week long retreats
uh i'm not sure how this is going to
materialize
but i hope that after the pandemic kind
of eases
uh there will be opportunities i mean
i've been
i don't i i'm not very good at
self-promotion and i'm
the i'm kind of adverse to
self-promotion so i don't even have a
website
developed yet but if people want to
contact me
they can contact me at the email address
that's on the back of my book
it's cm beige my initials and my name
at ysu ysu.edu which is my university
email address
and within a couple of months my website
should be up uh and the name of that
website will be chrisbash.com
so if someone wants to reach me they'll
be able to reach me there
and they'll be able to keep in touch
with what teachings i'm doing
where or what talks i'm giving at
chrisbeige.com
awesome and your books can be fun
can you briefly just uh summarize your
books i know we touched on a couple of
them but can you just
briefly yeah see if we can pique
people's interest to explore on their
own
well there there are four books uh
gee i i hope there's not more books
coming
you never know uh the first book is life
cycles on reincarnation
the second book is a book called dark
night early dawn
which was published by the state
university of new york press and
academic press and
it's a you know it's a challenging book
i mean i'm really kind of using all my
academic muscle
but i'm also beginning to share my
psychedelic experiences and i'm trying
to integrate
psychedelic research near-death episode
research
and out-of-body res out-of-body research
the work of robert monroe
so i'm really kind of it's it's a major
kind of
exploration of the implications of
non-ordinary states of consciousness
and then i wrote a book called the
living classroom
because as i mentioned my students were
being impacted
by my own psychedelic work and i began
to
understand that there are fields of
consciousness that grow up around
groups and that it wasn't simply that
they were having resonant experiences
with me or that somehow i was triggering
these experiences in them
but the groups of learning there were
fields of learning that were growing
around my courses
and that were influencing the learning
of new students as they entered these
courses
and so i wrote a book called the living
classroom which was also published by
suny press and all these books
are available on amazon and then
finally i've written lsd in the mind of
the universe
which really is kind of coming out of
the psychedelic closet
and really laying out what has really
been
the driving source of inspiration behind
all of my work
because even though i don't talk about
psychedelics in life cycles
and i don't talk about psychedelics in
the living classroom
once you know the full story of my
psychedelic
work you can understand how those books
came out of that work and expressed that
work
and even though i integrated with all of
the the scientific research and the
the philosophical research that's
present in those books
experientially the driving inspiration
came out of my psychedelic work
there is an academic work thank you
academia.edu is basically where all of
my articles that i've published
are can be found at that website so if
you go to academia.edu
and just punch in chris embase you'll
get to a page where you
have access to all of my research yeah
we have all the links
in the episode show notes
um yeah actually just to in terms of
your just to go back to your it's a
great body of work because like i said
already you've
synthesized so much and what we were
saying before we started is
that bookcase behind you you actually
gave away
more than half i think two-thirds of
your books after you're retired
so i i said it to my girlfriend earlier
today
i said this guy i'm interviewing today
not only is he twice my age but he's
you the books you you and me have read
this guy's probably write like a hundred
times more books right so
um it's it's truly truly an honor to
converse with you um over the last
couple of hours
thank you so much for spending the time
with us chris and um
yeah uh god bless thank you
thank you christian it's a pleasure a
deep pleasure
and an honor to be with be with you and
to be with your listeners today
truly
[Music]
thank you for listening to connecting
minds we hope you enjoyed this
conversation
and found an interesting illuminating or
inspiring
for episode show notes links and further
information on our guests
please visit christianjordanov.com if
you found this episode valuable
please share it with someone who might
also enjoy it thank you for being here